# *Self as GIS*

This journey began with a project that was to explore the theme of myself as a GIS; this project, in turn, began with the development of the first recollection repository. The first task was to ponder the information that I may strive to recollect. This led me to write prompts for the “name” of the place of interest (while being keenly aware of the tensions of forcing a “name” upon a more-than-human space; perhaps I was simply “framing” the place through my relation to it?), for the “why” of this place, for emergent questions/ponderings/uncertainties, for possible topics for discussion, for any miscellaneous thoughts, for an associated color, and for a description of any additional media collected. These prompts were left intentionally open-ended, although their precise order was carefully planned; yet I had also planned to bounce between prompts as necessary while recollecting. Also included were prompts for date, time, key (this was to differentiate my entries from those of any possible third-party), and (autofilled) latitude and longitude. Explanatory context was added to each prompt when appropriate, and the rationale behind each prompt was captured in my field notes. During this time, I had also determined the structure of the recollection repository. I had chosen to represent completed entries via points, but my notes indicate some dissatisfaction with the recollection repository’s inability to fully describe the boundaries of a place through points and prompted recollections.

Throughout this process, I had pondered the extent to which these recollection repositories ought to be accessible (and legible) to possible third-party users. These ponderings influenced the context provided within the recollection repository’s forms and prompts, as well as the use of open-source resources to develop and host the recollection repository. The web map, however, remained opaque, refusing to explain itself. As much pride as I may take in the recollection repository, it became necessary to remind myself that it was not the primary output for this project and that I ought to prioritize functionality over appearance (and, in some cases, legibility). After a bit of testing to ensure satisfactory functionality, I was ready to embark on the field excursion–and had realized that, if necessary, it would be possible to edit recollection entries after their initial submission, suggesting that the recollection entries need not be static. While entries themselves were ultimately left as-submitted, this realization nevertheless reduced the anxiety of crafting a “comprehensive” recollection entry.

With the repository in place, my attention turned to excursion planning. The number of places to revisit was set to be between five and ten, allowing for flexibility in the emergence of various places on the UW Seattle campus while ensuring a manageable scope. The intention was to take a single day to recollect, but I was prepared to set aside another if deemed necessary. As I planned this excursion, I found myself navigating a tension between allowing for complete emergence of places and recollections, and brainstorming predetermined intentions for the excursion. To soothe the uncomfortable uncertainty of a completely open-ended excursion, I engaged in some pre-excursion brainstorming. This was not to develop a concrete itinerary, but to begin thinking about the areas in which my wanderings might be most fruitful. A few other considerations that arose: post-excursion recollection adjustments would be acceptable; I would expect myself to recollect with care (yet care was not explicit in the prompts); the possible exploration of absences; whether this excursion would be unduly influenced by a social gathering later in the day.

On 7/2/2025, I embarked upon the first field excursion. Seven places emerged throughout the course of this field excursion, including some unexpected places and excluding some expected places. Such places were determined by allowing myself to drift throughout the campus and settle in spaces with which I have associations of comfort. Feeling underprepared proved to be generative, as places and recollections were able to emerge without being bounded by excessive preparation. I did not recognize any desire to withhold information as I crafted recollection entries in each place, and felt able to offer a necessary quantity of time in each space before drifting to the next. Soon after the excursion, I took some time to ponder particular excursion-related emergences and reflect upon the recollecting process. Recollection responses had built from each other within and across entries, suggesting a generative interplay between prompts and places. I was quite satisfied with the recollection repository, yet tensions lingered: what could I accomplish with more time and more recollected media? Following this moment of reflection, a copy of the recollection entries was made.

Next, it was time to begin planning the development of the self-as-GIS dialogue. First came the determination of a guiding structure, or “system,” for the dialogue; this “system” would be to organize the dialogue into primary discussion prompts. The analogy of discussion prompts as analytical tools came to mind in response to this structure; this emergent analogy, in part, led me to expand the self-GIS metaphor in the context of this recollection and dialogue development process: when recollecting in each place, I had accessed information from a me-GIS. This information would then be used to prompt a further exploration of the insights stored within the me-GIS.

The identities of the dialogue participants were pondered as well, with my attention drawn to a conflicting desire to lean on defined roles while also complicating such roles. The desire for a playful back-and-forth between participants, each asking questions of the other, was also made explicit during this brainstorming process. Accordingly, the original framing of a “conversational interview” shifted to that of a “dialogue” to emphasize a reciprocal relationship between the dialogue participants. One participant may ask more questions than the other, but they both share an intention to explore together. With this framing and the extended self-GIS metaphor both in mind, I decided that the two participants would take on the roles of Analyst Alex and GIS Alex. Also raised during this brainstorming session was the creative framing of a dialogue over tea; this would be rather playful, and would provide opportunities to incorporate indications of physical movement as conveyors of additional meaning. Real Alex quite enjoys tea, and has had many delightful and insightful conversations over a nice brew. It stands to reason that these two GIS-metaphor extensions of myself would as well.

Upon further reflection, I came to a few more conclusions regarding these dialogue participants. They would reminisce and recollect together, with no clear hierarchy between them; they could simply be extensions of myself, and I would not force them into rigid roles, despite their respective titles. I was never particularly keen on the title of “Analyst”, nor on the alternative considered option, “Explorer,” yet “Analyst Alex” did lend itself to a playful take on a geographic information system. As I pondered this dialogue, I had noted the influence of Dixon and Jones’ playful conversation between a spatial analyst and a poststructuralist (Dixon and Jones 1998); however, Analyst Alex and GIS Alex, as extensions of myself, were to be largely on the same page in terms of epistemological and ontological commitments–even as those commitments might possibly create tensions within their roles as analyst and as GIS, respectively.

To aid in the development of potential dialogue prompts, I organized a table of my recollection responses and themes found within those responses. With these themes in hand, I began to note possible prompts and questions for the dialogue. I had thought that I encountered a tension here, in that these questions would thus be predetermined and would not have emerged during the project; in hindsight, however, I realize that such questions were indeed emergent, for they were grounded in the contents of the recollection entries! With possible prompts and questions at the ready, I developed a rough outline of the dialogue. As prompts get deeper, so too would the teas “brewed” by the dialogue participants. From there, I began to identify key themes that would speak to all seven places as well as the UW campus more broadly. I had also pondered the possibility of discussing patterns in time spent in each place during the field excursion. It was around this point in the process that I had formally acknowledged the need to extend the time frame of this project and thus this research.

Satisfied with the emergent themes and possible prompts and questions, I began to plan the dialogue structure in greater detail. At this time, I first noted the possibility of reflecting upon my preferred spaces to recollect in, and raised the possibility of ending with a prompt about my identity in each space. I had decided to limit the dialogue to four prompts, intending to balance depth and breadth. With four prompts, I could pursue plenty of emergent reflections without the burden of an unwieldy quantity of prompts to raise and respond to. Yet, tellingly, there were indications that four prompts may never have been a likely outcome: the possibility of four prompts proving to be excessive was noted, as was the blending of two similar prompts into one. I had decided to set aside the question of whether three prompts would be ideal until after completing a discussion of the first prompt. With a project framing, dialogue participants, and prompts all (largely) set, I felt prepared–and excited!–to begin writing the dialogue.

After setting up the dialogue document, I conducted a dialogically written exploration of the seven places as guided by the first prompt: what brought me to each of these spaces, and how did I go about naming them? Once again, I extended the time frame of this project in response to the time and effort required to address this prompt. I found it helpful to keep a running to-do list as I crafted the dialogue. There was a bit of uncertainty that I had noted regarding the slight blurring of the participant’s roles; I was comfortable with these blurred roles, but such blurring risked complicating, or even undermining, the self-GIS metaphor. That said, I decided to trust that this complication would prove to be generative. Another tension arose, in this case regarding the inclusion of images. Would it be appropriate to share images of classroom spaces? At this point, I had used placeholder text to represent the intended images, and this placeholder text would remain until the dialogue draft was completed. (The inclusion of images was a tension that I ultimately sidestepped by not sharing this dialogue with a broad audience.) Tensions abound, it would seem, for I also noted that I was too exhausted from writing to properly record field notes. Instead, I made quick notes, and expanded upon them at a later time. Such notes may be slightly suspect, despite their honesty.

With the first prompt fully dialogue’d, I now knew that the length of the full dialogue would indeed be an issue. I decided to combine the second and third prompts, given their related themes, and raised the possibility of a condensed final draft. But while this portion of the process was mired in tensions and adjustments, I had realized that emergent realizations were also appearing in my writing. My sense of place was developing in real-time! Self-dialogic writing proved to be a generative method of prodding oneself for deeper reflection.

Quite drained by the first prompt, I decided to recharge my writing energies and focused primarily on preparing the introductions to the second and third (formerly fourth) prompts. I experienced some difficulty in preparing these introductions, having realized that they were deceptively ambitious in their scope–too much so. This suggests to me that my preparation for the dialogue was unknowingly incomplete; this had made it difficult to proceed with writing. Further, a self-GIS is not quite equipped to explore relations that are not linked to or familiar to oneself, which the second prompt had nevertheless called for. Thus, I decided to narrow the scope of this prompt. Feeling the strain of writing in-depth dialogic explorations of seven places, I decided to focus my effort on four representative places for the remaining prompts. This narrowed focus nudged me to grapple with an increase in possible absences, which reinforced a keen understanding of the situated nature of my written explorations. Two other considerations emerged while crafting (and reworking) the introductions to the second and third prompts: a reminder to be mindful of how I wield the concepts of space and place in the dialogue, and an (generative and optimistic) uncertainty about the possible relations between care and the exploration of place in the context of this project.

With these introductions in place, I was ready to further explore four places through self-dialogic writing, this time in response to the second prompt: how might I perceive the relations that are present in each space? Progress continued at a relatively slowed pace, and, once again, I extended the time frame for the completion of this self-dialogue. A few causes for this slowed progress, as observed in my field notes: there were a great deal of conceptual strands and throughlines to track; some of the thoughts and reflections in response to this prompt did not flow as naturally, or required more time and effort to ponder; it was simply too difficult to cover more than a few relations that I considered to be present in each place. To adjust to these struggles, I decided to focus on two relations per space–one “positive” and one “negative”–and to strive for unique and relevant pairings for each place. I found myself wondering if I was disheartened by the gradual reduction of possibilities as the dialogue continued to develop and take concrete shape, and as limits were imposed out of necessity. Not unrelated, I had raised the possibility of making edits at a later time, after the initial draft was completed.

A few observations from this point in the project process: my writing became particularly personal in response to the second prompt; I realized that I did not take full advantage of the dialogue staging (i.e. non-verbal cues); I engaged in a bit of light philosophical pondering as I wondered whether to over- or under-intellectualize would be more truthful to this self-dialogue (looking back, I find my writing to land somewhere in the middle); I noted the possibility of redundancy in the dialogue, striving to be mindful of unintentional repetition. Importantly, I had resolved to preserve an unedited version of the dialogue for myself, and craft a “Radio Edit” for a potential audience. Finally, I had wondered if this dialogue format might be stronger with a narrower scope.

With such musings out of my system and the second portion of the dialogue complete, I turned my attention to the third and final prompt: who am I in each of these spaces? Rather tellingly, the field notes for this portion were quite brief. Once again, four places were explored through the lens of the prompt; these explorations were followed by a brief reflection upon my identity as a geographer in space. Interestingly, this reflection on my identity as a geographer was relevant to the explorations of the four places, yet had largely fallen to the wayside. I had written a bit about absences, here, but, while some absences did indeed emerge through this self-dialogue, they were not raised or interrogated consistently. This points to a possible tension: if absences did not emerge “naturally,” would their inclusion thus be forced and therefore suspect? Of course, other tensions were noted as well. This dialogue unearths rich insights for myself, but to what extent is this work presentable, or even of interest or value, to an audience? How do I assess whether something is relevant to my sense of place? (If it “feels right?” How and why would something “feel right?” Is “felt right” a useful metric?) On an uplifting note, I did not notice myself holding back during my self-dialogic explorations of place.

To conclude this process, I inserted the relevant images into the dialogue document, pieced together a list of possible next-step items for when I may return to this project draft, and engaged in a bit of reflection and interim analysis. I reminded myself to carefully consider the role of care, place, and comfort in the next project, implicitly acknowledging the limitations of this dialogue in regards to each such concept. Absences, and the relations embedded in conventional GIS, were also flagged as requiring further reflection in the projects to come. Finally, on a somewhat celebratory note, I had observed that the uncertainties and anxieties that emerged throughout this process were proving to be rather generative.
