# *Memories in Place and Time*

One project draft completed, two to go! The workflow of the second project began with the development of the corresponding recollection repository. With the recollection repository structure in place thanks to my efforts during the previous project, I simply created another copy. A new recollection form, with prompts tailored to this project’s theme, was put together. A few prompts were borrowed from the previous recollection repository, with updated contextual explanations that shaped these prompts to the contours of this project. These prompts asked for the name of the place, an associated color, any miscellaneous thoughts, and an explanation of any media that had been gathered. I did not intend to collect media when recollecting memories in place, but I had wished to preserve the possibility of doing so.

To prompt for different elements of memories that might later be recollected and explored in greater detail, I settled on three new prompts: one for memories in a given space, one for the temporality of those memories, and one for the “precise” area of those memories. The second and third of these prompts were made optional, as they had touched on details that could be gathered at a later time, during further recollection of the emergent memories. With the prompts in place, a few tests were conducted to ensure the functionality of this second recollection repository.

During this process of piecing together the recollection repository, I had also given myself the opportunity to raise any open questions as the project process began. This included the ponderance of how one might interrogate memories through GIS, as well as a reflection upon a narrative mapping structure as my favored starting point for the exploration of memories. A few other considerations emerged, as well: I had decided to visit the same seven places as had emerged during the first project, to preserve consistency across the triptych; I also began planning the quantity of memories to recollect in each space. For this second consideration, I opted to aim for three to five memories in each space. To determine these three to five memories, I would focus on memories that seem to have the greatest influence on how I perceive a space. As I engaged in formal pre-excursion planning, the choice to follow the same order of places as the first excursion was made. I did note the possibility that, by storing memories in recollection entries, I may be revealing information about others who may be part of that memory. I opted to use initials or titles when crafting recollections, with the possibility of “encrypting” them later.

Revisiting the proposal for this research in an effort to ensure that I was on track with my implementation of the project theme, I realized that a desire to focus on emotions had been forgotten. I added brief notes about emotions to the recollection prompts, yet ultimately decided that the emotions of the memories would largely be explored after the excursion. Emotions, after all, could be derived from memories; further, I had rationalized that a broader approach to memories would allow for more possibilities when developing a GIS project. During this time, the absence of a land acknowledgement in the recollection repository was raised, although one was never added (I had pondered the inclusion of a land acknowledgement both on the web map, and in the recollection form; ultimately, I concluded that I should give it more thought–and, regrettably, never quite got around to doing so). A bit of time for project brainstorming was set aside, too. While the primary vision for the project was solidifying as a narrative map, I wished to remain open to unconventional techniques.

The second field excursion was successful, yet I found myself enjoying the recollection process less than the first. As I gathered memories in each place (and honored my relations to space by doing so in situ), I reminded myself that I would give further memories space to emerge. As I recollected memories, two types of memories had emerged: more prominent memories, of which roughly three to five came to mind in each place, as well as smaller memories that, while perhaps less central to my sense of place, refused to go unnoted. No images were collected, but I did raise the possibility of collecting images and other relevant media at a later time.

A bit of anxiety had seeped into the entire process, as the unresolved tension of the uncertain role of emotions in this project had caused me to second guess my choices. This led me to note that I really ought to have spent more time crafting the recollection prompts beforehand, as did the awkward back-and-forth across the various memory-related prompts as I recollected particular memories, their spaces, and their temporalities, struggling to keep them organized (I decided to use an alphabetical labelling system across the three prompt responses to link individual memories with their respective spaces and temporalities). The prompt contexts that I prepared had further contributed to messy responses, suggesting that the contexts had raised too many sub-prompts than was possible to address carefully when recollecting in-situ. Add to that a few difficulties regarding the recollection repository’s ability to read some of the colors that I had associated with each place, a slight rush to avoid traffic, the slightest of sour moods, and an underlying sense that my mind was not at its sharpest.

I was a bit underwhelmed by the recollected information, but there was much to work with nevertheless. I was able to ease my dissatisfaction by reminding myself that these recollection entries are merely a starting point. Singular memories were surprisingly scarce; many of my memories in these seven places were blends of various moments. A tricky question came to mind: are any of these recollection memories unreliable? While some memories were cross-referenced with past calendar entries and schedules to ensure accurate temporality, many pieces of these memories would have been far more difficult to verify. I had set this consideration aside, for the time being. I made a copy of the recollection entries, then engaged in some spontaneous reflection.

One instance of such spontaneity saw me ponder the reconciliation of memories and emotions. How might I place memories in conversation with the emotions that I associate with each space, and vice versa? Emotions, to the extent that they had emerged during the recollection process, were remarkably oversimplified when noted in writing. I resolved that, should emotions become a central focus, they could be derived in greater detail and nuance from corresponding memories. I also found myself disheartened by the fact that I simply could not possibly explore all relevant considerations; in response, I consoled myself with the reminder that this work is an exploration of a methodological process–an experiment, even–and there was not a pressing need to be comprehensive. If, of course, comprehensivity is even possible to begin with… My mind then dove into the pre-planning of the next field excursion, raising the possibility of setting aside a greater amount of time to recollect as well as an appeal to a wider range of senses. Finally, I found myself concerned about whether or not I was losing sight of “place” in my work, due to a disproportionate focus on memories and the self.

Next, I had formally set aside time to brainstorm ideas for the design of the GIS project. I opted to craft a familiar narrative web map structure, although my first idea for the narrative map–to include a distinct map layer for each memory–was dismissed for its unwieldiness. More concerns about the memory/emotion quandary emerged, prompting me to simply consider exploring both simultaneously. The possibility of grouping memories by emotional similarities was raised, as was the representation of time. A desire for interactivity in the project output was made explicit. I had also considered creating recordings of myself narrating each memory, although this was dismissed due to the nagging discomfort I feel when hearing recordings of myself. I briefly considered recording AI voice-overs instead, but doing so would have lacked the unique expression of my own narration and thus miss the point entirely.

I also took some time to consider how I might work characteristics of each space into the project. Might I add fun and playful pieces to map elements to represent spatial characteristics? Similarly, I pondered the use of images that approximated my own perspective (such as those collected during the first field excursion) to challenge the cartographic view-from-nowhere. While I was curious about the possibilities of more-than-cartographic GIS design, I decided not to force the emergence of such representations, nor force the recollection information to fit into them. At this point in the development process, my initial vision for the project elements proved to be rather similar to the “final” product. Finally, I had noted that this brainstorming process was indeed supportive of efforts to make sense of my sense of place.

Around this time, I had taken a step back from this project to focus on other work. A few ideas emerged during this time, including: a plan to create a practice GeoJSON file to aid in project development, and for the adopted GeoJSON structure to allow for open-ended values; a reminder to myself that recollection is an ongoing and multi-step process; a reflection upon care in the context of this work (Does my operationalization of care indeed lead to further nuances in/of place? How might care for space extend beyond in-person recollection?); a possible exploration of futurity through this second project. Some of the other work to which I had directed my focus included preparing for, and completing, the field excursion for the third project.

After this time away, I began to develop the project structure. To build the project, I opted for the same open-source web mapping library as I had used in the recollection repositories: Leaflet.js. Early in this development process, I set up a to-do list to track intended steps toward the completion of the project draft. A few considerations were weighed: the extent to which a formal, defining “narrative” should be presented through this project (to avoid overstructuring an exploration of memories, minimal narrative was put forth); whether to represent each memory by polygon, or by point (by point was chosen); a possible inclusion of numerical values in the dataset to allow for quantitative analysis (while space for numerical values was built into the dataset, it has yet to be applied); the use of toggles to filter memories by emotion and by time (this was indeed implemented); the incorporation of some sort of visual quirk into the memory descriptions (after some tinkering, this “quirk” manifested as images for a handful of the memories). While these possibilities were being raised, a key decision was made: to support the exploration of memories, a text box would feature descriptions of a given memory/point that had been selected on the map. With the primary relationships between filters, map, and memory descriptions determined, I was ready to actively build the project output.

To save time, I entered a textual description of my intended web map design into Microsoft’s generative AI, Copilot, and requested coding assistance. This prompt was successful; all of the requested elements were included, and, after a bit of reworking on my end, the code for the basic project structure was up and running. The output code produced by Copilot was adjusted in Visual Studio Code, with some assistance from the built-in Copilot code editor to quickly adjust the element styles. In hindsight, I may not have specified my project scope in enough detail in the AI prompt, leaving some interpretation, and thus influence, to Copilot; yet the resulting project structure was quite close to what I had imagined it to be.

Emboldened, I once again asked Copilot to support the project development by offering code that would build the intended textbox. This textbox would feature a description of a selected memory, as well as related features (such as the name of the place and associated times and emotions). Once again, this prompt was largely successful, but a few adjustments were required to tailor the output to existing code and refine the element styles. Pushing my luck a bit too far, I returned once more to Copilot, requesting code that would add visual movement (via moving emojis) to the text box according to a memory’s “quirk” value. The output I received was unusable–although I am certainly at least partly to blame for an inadequate prompt–and, as a result, I decided to use images for visual interest, and thus as “quirks.” To further add visual interest, I opted to set the text box border to a color associated with each memory. During this process, I had used a test GeoJSON with my intended data features to support my debugging efforts.

With a web map now up and running, I turned my attention/ire to the basemap. I had used the same grayscale OpenStreetMap basemap as that of the recollection repositories, but I found it to be lacking here. Something less busy would have been desirable, and, eventually, I found it (more on that in the description of the third project process). Roughly during this point in the development process, I started building the formal GeoJSON dataset, intended to store the memories of interest. From this point forward, the dataset and web map development occurred concurrently.

As the final use of AI in the context of this project, I requested assistance in checking the values of an array object against those of a set object; slight adjustments to the sample output produced by Copilot allowed each memory to feature multiple associations and times to filter by. Put differently: a memory could span multiple emotions and times, and if any one of the associated times and any one of the associated emotions were to be selected, that memory would appear on the map. As a consequence of inconsistently relying on AI assistance to develop the underlying code of the project (which is to say, Copilot had very little context regarding the code I was actively working with), the final web page itself runs relatively inefficiently. The current code would likely prove problematic if this project were to be expanded with a larger dataset. This places some limitations on the extent to which this exact project model may be reproduced.

To bring life to this project, I had pieced together a GeoJSON file using the information collected during the field excursion. I had drafted the intended data features in a text document, then manually pieced together a GeoJSON file in Visual Studio Code. The primary undertaking here was to write descriptions for each of the recollected memories. While I had noted a need to refine the memories later, I have yet to follow up on this need (naturally, there are indeed typos that persist in the current project draft). Interestingly, I noticed that my descriptions of the memories offered more commentary than I had expected; this is perhaps unsurprising, given that memories were in the active process of (re)construction. Not every recollected memory had made it into the final dataset–some “secondary” memories were left out, as was a negative blend of memories in one particular place–but many of the “secondary” memories were incorporated into memory descriptions, particularly in the descriptions for memories that had blended together across time. Nor were all memories of equal precision. Some absences were noticed when revisiting my recollection entries; these absences were noted, and left as they were. As it so happens, I severely underestimated the task of writing these memory descriptions; such writing proved to be exhausting, and it took me the span of a few days to complete them.

Early in this dataset-crafting process, I had decided to represent each memory by a point. Many of the memories, after all, could be centered around a particular point in space. Academic years emerged as the temporal unit, given that I naturally measure time in such a manner. Many memories, however, proved to span multiple years, and thus were associated with more than one academic year. Memory descriptions offered an opportunity to note further temporal precision, when appropriate. I had considered the possibility that a memory would only appear if all of the corresponding years were selected on the web map, rationalizing that these memories emerge as they do as a direct result of these multiple years of buildup. Ultimately, I decided that, while fascinating, this would overcomplicate the project. Perhaps another time? Similar to time, I had initially wished to associate emotions with each memory. Yet, I had found that “emotion,” as a term, was misleading; many of the “feelings” that I associate with memories, after all, tend to be something deeper. Thus, I opted to switch to “associations,” rather than “emotions.” My rationale here was that associations were more open-ended, while remaining relatively intuitive due to the self-explanatory nature of the assorted “associations” themselves.

With memory descriptions at the ready, I began to craft the GeoJSON dataset by hand (or, rather, by text editor). Because I sought to use arrays to store multiple values for time and association, I needed a flexible option for constructing a GeoJSON dataset that would allow me to do so. As much as I adore geojson.io, it proved unsatisfactory in this regard. To position the memories in space, I collected coordinates from Google Maps (the satellite view proved to be rather helpful). These coordinates represented the ideal approximations of the site of each memory. That said, it was quite difficult to pinpoint the intended space via exact coordinates, and at times it was necessary to manufacture some artificial distance between some memories to prevent excessive spatial overlap. There were some discrepancies between my chosen basemap and Google Maps, leading to some slight misplacements, and the coordinates would likely benefit from slight adjustments. Managing the coordinates of memories that spanned multiple sites was difficult; multipoint geometries were considered, but I ultimately decided to pinpoint the memories where it felt right to do so. I am, after all, the most qualified to place my memories in space.

With memory descriptions, coordinates, and times at the ready, I turned to associations. To identify a manageable quantity of associations to, well, associate, I listed relevant themes that had emerged from the memory descriptions, and condensed them into overarching themes. Some memories were associated with themes that were perhaps unkind, and I decided to leave those associations out. The exploration of those “unkind” themes had already been done, and I did not wish to perpetuate this negativity. With this list of overarching themes in hand, I revisited each memory description and noted relevant themes.

With memory descriptions, coordinates, times, and associations at the ready, I completed the GeoJSON by adding quirks, colors, and (placeholders for) numerical values. Each memory would be associated with a quirk; each quirk would, in turn, be linked to some sort of unique visual representation. While I have yet to give up on the use of quirks, their incorporation is, at present, decidedly incomplete. Similarly incomplete yet not-given-up-on-yet is the use of numerical values in the dataset; as playful as a quantitative analysis of something as situated and abstract as memories would be, I simply could not determine a suitable variable to quantify. Thus, the GeoJSON file includes spaces for quantitative values that remain empty. Finally, I referred to the associated colors from the recollection entries to help identify colors for each memory. It is quite fascinating to observe patterns in the use of color; in some cases, the color matches the characteristics of the space, in others, it is abstract, and in others still it is a fleeting color, present during the moment of the memory but perhaps never again.

With the dataset complete and added to the web map, it was time for a few finishing touches. I added a land acknowledgement to this project, quite prominently placed beneath the title. After cleaning up the code, I reflected upon the broader process of this research. Due to slower-than-anticipated progress, I decided to focus on preparing project drafts for my own analysis, rather than for an audience. If this particular ending comes across as abrupt, know that it very much was; I was certainly feeling the time crunch as the upcoming academic quarter encroached upon my work, and had to move on to other work (including the third project).
